all: make it easier to migrate off of gopkg.in/check.v1 (#25484)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/contributing/testing/unit.rst

Integration Testing
===================

Cilium uses the standard `go test <https://golang.org/pkg/testing/>`__ framework.

> All new tests `must use testing`_.

Reviewer: Edits for clarity, specific is better than general. This also affects link formatting 👇🏻 
```suggestion
All new tests must use `the standard test framework`_.
```

> Historically, `gocheck <https://gopkg.in/check.v1>`__ has also been used and
> there are still many tests written using ``gocheck`` today, which has some
> unfortunate consequences.

Reviewer: Edits for clarity
```suggestion
Historically, `gocheck <https://gopkg.in/check.v1>`__ has also been used. 
Many tests are still written using ``gocheck``, which creates some
unfortunate consequences:
```

1. Adding a test helper requires writing two versions: one for ``testing.T``
   and one for ``check.C``.

> 2. Executing those tests requires using non-standard flags.

Reviewer: Specific is better than general
```suggestion
2. Executing ``gocheck`` tests requires non-standard flags.
```

> For this reason ``gopkg.in/check.v1`` has been switched to a fork called
> ``github.com/cilium/checkmate``, which removes most of the problematic bits.
> Please help migrating away from ``gocheck`` by following the procedure outlined
> in :ref:`migrate-gocheck`.

Reviewer: Edits for clarity, use active voice, use plain, clear language.
```suggestion
For this reason ``gopkg.in/check.v1`` has switched to a fork called
``github.com/cilium/checkmate``, which removes most of the problematic bits.
You can migrate away from ``gocheck`` by following the procedure outlined
in :ref:`migrate-gocheck`.
```

> .. _must use testing: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/issues/16860

Reviewer: Updated link format ☝🏻 
```suggestion
.. _the standard test framework: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/issues/16860
```

   possibly in the helper you added to replace ``SetUp``.

3. Replace calls to ``c.Assert`` with `assert`_.

4. Replace tests methods with a normal ``func TestHelloWorld(t *testing.T)``
   function.

Let's take an example from the ``gocheck`` documentation and migrate it:

.. code-block:: go

    package hello_test

    import (
        "testing"

        . "gopkg.in/check.v1"
    )

    func Test(t *testing.T) { TestingT(t) }

    type MySuite struct{}

    var _ = Suite(&MySuite{})

    func (s *MySuite) SetUpTest(c *C) {
        // setup code
    }

    func (s *MySuite) TearDownTest(c *C) {
        // cleanup code
    }

    func (s *MySuite) TestHelloWorld(c *C) {
        c.Assert(42, Equals, "42")
    }

    type SomeOtherSuite struct{}

    var _ = Suite(&SomeOtherSuite{})

    func (s *SomeOtherSuite) TestTheRealAnswer(c *C) {
        c.Assert("42", Equals, "42")
    }

After applying the above rules we might end up with something like this:

.. code-block:: go

    package hello_test

    import (
        "testing"

        . "github.com/cilium/checkmate"
        "github.com/stretchr/testify/assert"
    )

    func Test(t *testing.T) { TestingT(t) }

>     func setupHelper(tb testing.TB) {

Reviewer 2: nit: in my experience it's good practice to mark test helpers using [`TB.Helper`](https://pkg.go.dev/testing#T.Helper) so that file and line information of the caller will be reported instead of the ones of the helper.

```suggestion
    func setupHelper(tb testing.TB) {
        tb.Helper()
```

        // setup code

        tb.Cleanup(func() {
            // cleanup code
        })
    }

    func TestHelloWorld(t *testing.T) {
        setupHelper(t)

        assert.Equal(t, 42, "42")
    }

    type SomeOtherSuite struct{}

    var _ = Suite(&SomeOtherSuite{})

    func (s *SomeOtherSuite) TestTheRealAnswer(c *C) {
        assert.Equal(c, "42", "42")
    }

> As you can see we didn't get round to converting all tests yet, but that is OK.

Reviewer 3: I really wish we'd move away from the 'suite' concept, at least for new code, as it tightly couples the environments of multiple tests. It would be useful to reaffirm this in an additional short paragraph. Currently, this could be interpreted as "adding tests leaning on checkmate is OK". If you're working on extending test coverage, taking some extra time to lift a suite out of check.C would be much appreciated.

Author: Agreed and this isn't meant to encourage using suite. Reworded a bit and shuffled some of the doc around.

    $ watchtest pkg/policy

This shell script depends on the ``inotify-tools`` package on Linux.

.. _migrate-gocheck:

Migrating tests off of ``gopkg.in/check.v1``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Cilium codebase has historically used ``gopkg.in/check.v1`` to write unit and
integration tests. Most of the functionality offered by that package is now

> present in `testing`_. What ``gocheck`` calls checkers are now available in `assert`_:

Reviewer 4: More a question than a comment. Is it there any guideline about [*assert*](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/stretchr/testify/assert) vs [*require*](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/stretchr/testify/require)? It seems that both are used in the repo currently, but this doc mentions *assert* only.

Reviewer 5: You assert when the following assertions do not require the assertions before to hold true. You require when you do. So if you're going to index a slice, you should require.Len to be non-zero before you do the indexing, otherwise your test might panic. Usually it's most useful for checking errors since your other return value will probably be nil.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for the clarification, makes definitely sense to me. I personally tend to mostly use *require* to be on the safe side, given that in many cases an error would cause a cascade of failures. But since here I saw that only *assert* was mentioned, I started wondering whether there was any different guideline...

Reviewer 5: Yeah, the interfaces are the same, use whatever makes the most sense for the situation you're in.

Author: I'm probably in the require camp myself, didn't realise that assert didn't `Fatal` the test. I'll add a little blurb.

Author: Turns out that `C.Assert` behaves like `require.*`, so I updated the doc accordingly.

        // cleanup code
    }

    func (s *MySuite) TestHelloWorld(c *C) {
        c.Assert(42, Equals, "42")
    }

    type SomeOtherSuite struct{}

    var _ = Suite(&SomeOtherSuite{})

    func (s *SomeOtherSuite) TestTheRealAnswer(c *C) {
        c.Assert("42", Equals, "42")
    }

After applying the above rules we might end up with something like this:

.. code-block:: go

    package hello_test

    import (
        "testing"

        . "github.com/cilium/checkmate"
        "github.com/stretchr/testify/assert"
    )

    func Test(t *testing.T) { TestingT(t) }

    func setupHelper(tb testing.TB) {
        tb.Helper()

        // setup code

        tb.Cleanup(func() {
            // cleanup code
        })
    }

    func TestHelloWorld(t *testing.T) {
        setupHelper(t)

        assert.Equal(t, 42, "42")
    }

    type SomeOtherSuite struct{}

    var _ = Suite(&SomeOtherSuite{})

    func (s *SomeOtherSuite) TestTheRealAnswer(c *C) {
        assert.Equal(c, "42", "42")
    }

As you can see we didn't get round to converting all tests yet.
Since ``C`` now implements ``testing.TB`` we can call ``assert.Equal`` from
``TestTheRealAnswer()`` without problems.

> .. _assert: https://github.com/stretchr/testify/assert

Reviewer 4: This link leads to a 404. Should it be https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/stretchr/testify/assert?

    $ watchtest pkg/policy

This shell script depends on the ``inotify-tools`` package on Linux.

.. _migrate-gocheck:

Migrating tests off of ``gopkg.in/check.v1``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Cilium codebase has historically used ``gopkg.in/check.v1`` to write unit and
integration tests. Most of the functionality offered by that package is now
present in `testing`_. What ``gocheck`` calls checkers are now available in

> ``testify``, either in `assert`_ or `require`_ form.

Reviewer: Clarity
```suggestion
``testify``, in either `assert`_ or `require`_ form.
```

* ``check.Equals``: ``require.EqualValues``

* ``check.HasLen``: ``require.Len``

* ``check.ErrorMatches``: ``require.ErrorContains`` (doesn't support regex)

* ``checker.Equals`` and ``checker.DeepEquals``: ``require.Equal``

> It is best to replace ``check.C.Assert`` with ``require`` calls instead of ``assert``, since the latter doesn't stop test execution if the assertion fails.

Reviewer: s/since/because to clarify the causative relationship
```suggestion
It's best to replace ``check.C.Assert`` with ``require`` calls instead of ``assert`` because the latter doesn't stop test execution if the assertion fails.
```

> ``gopkg.in/check.v1`` has been replaced with ``github.com/cilium/checkmate`` which

Reviewer: Comma nit
```suggestion
``gopkg.in/check.v1`` has been replaced with ``github.com/cilium/checkmate``, which
```

means that ``check.C`` now implements `testing.TB <https://pkg.go.dev/testing#TB>`__
and can be passed to test helpers that take ``testing.TB``.

The end goal is to remove all uses of ``checkmate`` from the codebase.

> To convert a ``gocheck`` test you can use the following approach:

Reviewer: Style
```suggestion
To convert a ``gocheck`` test, use the following approach:
```

1. Replace ``SetUp`` fixtures with helpers that take ``testing.TB``.

2. Replace ``TearDown`` fixtures with calls to ``testing.TB.Cleanup()``,
   possibly in the helper you added to replace ``SetUp``.

3. Replace calls to ``c.Assert`` with ``require`` equivalents.

4. Replace tests methods with a normal ``func TestHelloWorld(t *testing.T)``
   function.

Let's take an example from the ``gocheck`` documentation and migrate it:

.. code-block:: go

    package hello_test

    import (
        "testing"

        . "gopkg.in/check.v1"
    )

    func Test(t *testing.T) { TestingT(t) }

    type MySuite struct{}

    var _ = Suite(&MySuite{})

    func (s *MySuite) SetUpTest(c *C) {
        // setup code
    }

    func (s *MySuite) TearDownTest(c *C) {
        // cleanup code
    }

    func (s *MySuite) TestHelloWorld(c *C) {
        c.Assert(42, Equals, "42")
    }

    type SomeOtherSuite struct{}

    var _ = Suite(&SomeOtherSuite{})

    func (s *SomeOtherSuite) TestTheRealAnswer(c *C) {
        c.Assert("42", Equals, "42")
    }

> After applying the above rules we might end up with something like this:

Reviewer: s/above/previous, address the reader as "you"
```suggestion
After applying the previous rules you should end up with something like this:
```
